# Lecture 1

## Parallel Algorithm

Important factors:

1. Number of processors

2. Time

Operation is the product of time and number of processors.

## Example 1

Summing $n$ numbers

1. Divide and conquer with $\frac{n}2$ processors. Then we can always do each step in parallel, so the time is the number of steps, $log(n)$.

    ```
    for (i = 0, i < log(n), ++i) {
        for P % 2^(i+1) == 0 do in parallel {
            // P starts with 0.
            A[P] = A[P] + A[P+2^i];
        }
    }
    ```

2. Use less processors. Group by $log(n)$ numbers, and use $\frac{n}{log(n)}$ processors. Then we have one processor for each group, and we can sum each group sequentially in $log(n)$ time, then use all the $\frac{n}{log(n)}$ processors to add $\frac{n}{log(n)}$ numbers divide and conquer in $log(\frac{n}{log(n)})$ time. The overall time is still $O(log(n))$.

Theorem for lower bound of time: A step with $P$ processors in $T$ time can be translated into a sequential processor in $P\cdot{T}$ time.

So for best sequential time $T_1$, then $P\cdot{T_P}\geq{T}_1$.

So for summing, the sequential time is $O(n)$ (in fact $n-1$), this is the lower bound for $P\cdot{T}$

## Model

PRAM: Parallel Random Access Machine.

EREW: Exclusive read exclusive write.

CREW: Concurrent read exclusive write.

CRCW: Concurrent read concurrent write.

### Conflict-resolution

Common < arbitrary < priority

- arbitrary

- priority (by process index)

- common (have to write same value)

## Example 2

Find smallest number:

1. Naive: $n^2$ processors, set 1 on the larger number, return the number with 0. The time is constant.

2. Use less processors. Group by $n^{\frac{1}{2}}$, each group uses $n$ processors, altogether $n^{\frac{3}{2}}$ processors. Then merge within constant time.

3. $n$ numbers, $n^{\frac{5}{4}}$ processors: Group by $n^{\frac{1}{4}}$, the needed number of processors is just $(n^{\frac{1}{4}})^2\cdot{n}^{\frac{3}{4}}$. Then there are $n^{\frac{3}{4}}$ numbers to merge, group by $n^{\frac{3}{8}}$, the needed number of processors is $n^{\frac{9}{8}}$, less than $n^{\frac{5}{4}}$.

4. $n$ numbers, $n$ processors: Group by $\sqrt{n}$, can be merged with available $n$ processors; Subgroup by $n^{\frac{1}{4}}$, can be merged with available $\sqrt{n}$ processors, till the end. $T(n,n)=1+T(n^{\frac{1}{2}},n^{\frac{1}{2}})=i+T(n^{\frac{1}{2^i}},n^{\frac{1}{2^i}})$. When $n^{\frac{1}{2^i}}$ is constant $c$, then $i$ is $log(log(n))$.

Maximum independent set: The maximum set of vertices with no connecting edges between them.

6. When we have an algorithm using $P$ processors running in $T_P$ time, then we can simulate this algorithm with $p<P$ processors within $\frac{P\cdot{T}_P}{p}+T_p$. So this is linear for $p>n$, since we have $log(log(n))$ for $n$ and $1$ for $n^{\frac{5}{4}}$.
